and we're moving on just a little bit
down the timeline to my favorite
astronomer arist starus of
Samos and he lived from 310 to about 230
BC again some of these numbers we're not
entirely sure about so you have to take
them with a little bit of a pinch of
salt and the first thing that uh we have
to say about arist darkus is that he
published quite a number of books um on
different astronomical subjects um but
just like eudoxus they've all been lost
we've got um most of his uh titles are
referred to by other people that came
later and the main texts of what he
wrote about are
missing but the first thing that he came
up with was
the idea that in fact instead of having
the Earth at the center as Brian was
talking
about that the sun should go at the
center now most people think that this
was an idea put forward by cernus much
uh later so 2,000 years later but it's
uh the case that uh arist starus was
certainly one of a number of people
putting this idea around much longer ago
he suggested that uh the things worked
out much more sensibly if you had the
sun remaining stationary at the middle
while the Earth and all the planets sat
on individual spheres that then revolved
around them and this solved things like
the problem of uh the retrograde motion
of uh the outer planets and the phases
and the sizes and so on and the
brightnesses of uh the inner planets
it all just made more sense if you
figured it out that way um but he also
worked out that the Universe must be
much larger than people commonly
believed we had the idea that it didn't
just stop just beyond Saturn's orbit as
shown here and then have the fixed stars
but that the stars were actually much
much further away than the planets
he actually wrote about the idea that
the stars were in fact other Suns which
of course we now know to be true and
said that they were so far away that any
movement of them was creating a such a
tiny amount of change in the apparent
angles um as shown in the diagram here
this is how we measure the distance to
nearby stars at least is by measuring
the change in the angular position at
different times of the year using the
Earth's orbit as a Baseline and doing
some uh similar triangles to work out
how much the nearby stars have moved
compared to the ones that are so far
away that they don't appear to change at
all um and he he came up with the idea
of being able to do this measurement by
Parallax but of course because the
telescope hadn't been invented um he
wasn't able to make accurate enough
measurements to uh achieve any of this
in
reality now we do have a few bits of his
uh surviving work and one of the
fragments is this diagram here which
comes from his publication the
translation of the title is on the sizes
and distances of the Sun and the Moon
this was a topic which
made great progress in uh in that
diagram there the large circle is the
sun the mediumsized one is supposed to
be the earth and the small one is the
moon and we're looking at the moon going
into a lunar eclipse there that's what
that diagram is all about and I shall
explain more as we go
through so the first thing that he
noticed about the sizes and the relative
sizes was that when you had an eclipse
the moon and the sun were just the right
size in the sky so that the disc of the
Moon perfectly covered the disk of the
Sun and so they the apparent size was
the same and he also worked out that it
was half a degree on the sky now
actually that's the some debate about
that because different texts uh of
aristotles and others write about that
half degree figure and give different
numbers but anyway he concluded that
whatever the ratio of the distance was
the ratio of the sun must be
proportionately that much larger than
the moon um and that's a very sound
piece of
reasoning but he went further and
realized that when the moon is at half
phase viewed from the earth we see half
of it lit and half of it dark then you
must have this situation here you you
are standing on the earth down at this
point of the triangle you're seeing
exactly half the moon lit and half of it
dark and so this angle here must be
90° and then you have a very long thin
triangle out to the Sun and he reasoned
that if you could measure this
angle you could then solve the uh shape
of the triangle and obtain a a ratio for
the distance between U and the moon and
U and the Sun and he measured the angle
and came out with
87° and that told him that the triangle
long sides were 19 times longer than the
short side
approximately now it wasn't exactly
right about that the angle he should
have measured would have been 89 12°
very nearly 90 and the ratio would
therefore be much bigger at 400 to1 so
the the sun is 400 times further away
from us than the moon is but he got a
ratio of well somewhere around 19 or 20
to
one but then he also used the idea of
lunar
eclipses and was able to take the uh
complicated geometry that we've got
where the moon goes into the shadow of
the Earth Earth and we've got the
distances all marked out with different
letters on this diagram here and uh you
can work through the mathematics of this
it's a little bit complicated but uh
here it is um basically here's his first
assertion that uh the angle here of 87
degrees tells us something about the
shape of this triangle but it also
reasoned that because of the uh Cosmic
coincidence that if the length s to L
ratio must be the same as the ratio of
the diameter of the Moon to the diameter
of the Sun and so you could start to
feed these numbers into the the rest of
the calculation here and you can do all
the maths down here and end up with a
relationship between the uh diameter of
the Shadow here and the side size of the
sun and the size of the Earth he can't
quite solve everything from there but
what he came up with was uh some numbers
for the some of the ratios involved so
he worked out that the sun's radius in
terms of Earth radius was 6.7 times
bigger and that the Earth was 2.85 times
bigger than the moon and that the Earth
Moon distance was 20 times the size of
the Earth and that the Earth Sun
distance in Earth radi was
380 um now you see the modern numbers
over here so some of them were not
particularly accurate this one wasn't
too bad 2.85 versus three but it all
fell to this number that he had in that
very first observation of 87° being a
bit off um plus there is some Deb about
the uh number he used for the uh angular
size of the um the Sun and the Moon on
the sky Archimedes says he used 0.5
degrees but if you use 0.5 degrees you
don't get those
answers um and what arist aras's
writings that we've got say is that it
was a 15th of a meros unfortunately
there are two meanings of meos one means
7 and a half degrees and the other one
means
30° now the 7 and a half
degre one divided by 15 does give you a
half degree size for the uh Sun and the
Moon the other one gives you a two
degree size which is completely
different so why did he get it wrong
well the main reason that he got it
wrong was
because when trying to make that
original
observation of looking to see where the
sun was compared to the Moon he was
looking through the Earth's atmosphere
and the Sun is always a bit lower down
at Sunset than you expect and you You
observe because
the Earth's atmosphere acts like a lens
we see this in astronomy we see the uh
light being split into the red and blue
components slightly differently because
they red and blue light are bent by a
different amount but it does change the
position and in fact it can mean that
the sun has already set by one and a
half degrees when you can still in fact
see it because the light is being bent
over the horizon to you and really that
was the difference if uh he had known
that he had to correct for that he would
have probably used a number of 89 and a
half degrees in his calculations and got
a much much closer number
now just going to say that you know we
know the distance to the Moon and much
more accurately these days in 1958 we
bounced some radar beams off it with
very short pulses using two megawatts of
power you have to use a lot of power if
you're going to send a radar pulse out
and receive the reflection back but it
gave us the distance to the Moon to uh
this number here 38 for 402 kilm plus or
minus just 1 kilometer and so we were
able to make much better measurements
than that but of course you're also
dealing with the fact that it's not a
constant and so uh the moon's orbit very
elliptical around the earth so it makes
quite a difference as to when you're
talking about it now arist stus was
assuming everything was moving in those
famous circles and circles on circles so
he didn't figure out that the Moon
looked a different size when it's uh at
perige near to the Earth compared to
when it's at apery if he had he might
have realized that there were elliptical
orbits
involved of course we can also measure
this same lunar Distance by bouncing
laser beams off these reflectors that
have been sent to the moon and uh get
much more accurate measurements and that
tells us that the Moon is moving away
from us that's moving away by 3.8 CM
every year all due to the effect of the
tides so there was a lot more to the
distance to the Moon than arist darkus
would ever have
known but he's also got his name on one
of my favorite craters on the moon
itself shown with the big blue arrow
there and a nice uh inset high
resolution picture of it this is the
crater arist darkus over here it's the
brightest feature on the moon very
appropriate for such a clever man
there's a another zoom in on the same
piece of it it's also a very interesting
region there's a lot of these collapsed
lava tubes and other volcanic domes and
other uh regions around
here here again is another picture of it
taken from orbits flying over the arist
starus region and Apollo 15 flew over
arist darkus and detected radioactivity
in the form of alpha particles coming
from radon gas radon 222 which is a
Decay product of uh nuclear reactions
involving things like uranium but it
only has a half life of 3.8 days so for
there to be a cloud of it that Apollo 15
could fly through it must have been
released fairly recently and this is
associated with the fact that some
people see what are called transient
lunar phenomena in this region uh where
clouds of gas and uh dust appear to
emerge and then float over the surface
and uh so something definitely going on
in this
region the Luna prospector came along
and measured it again and again we got a
superb uh image of the crater there and
as Brian points out on some of our
observing sessions sometimes arist
starus looks blue here is a photograph
taken you have to pick just the right
time but uh it's uh suddenly much much
Bluer Than the Rest of the colors of the
Moon perhaps the the color's been wound
up a little bit too far on this picture
there's another one here where showing
the normal gray regali of the surface of
the Moon here with this amazing blue
color of arista's
crater so I think my favorite astronomer
also has my favorite crater on the moon
named after him and with that I'll
finish